---
title: 'Power calculations for population attributable fraction (PAF)'
date: 2023-10-19
permalink: /posts/2023/10/post-2/
tags:
  - population attributable fraction
  - PAF
  - power calculations
  - relative risk
  - RR
  - minimum detectable PAF
---

A collaborator recently asked me to do power calculations for the population attributable fraction (PAF) of a dichotomous exposure, $F$, for an incident outcome, $D$. In a previous iteration, we had focused instead on using standard sample size and power calcuation approaches to get a minimum detectable relative risk (RR) assuming known sample size, outcome rate, exposure prevalence, and 80% power. While there is a paper by Browner and Newman (1989) for sample size and power for the PAF, I think an alternate approach could use the minimum detectable RR that I had already computed and the relationship between the PAF and RR. 

### Definition of population attributable fraction (PAF)

The population attributable fraction is typically defined by the proportion of disease incidence in a population that is attributable to the exposure of interest, specified by 
$$PAF = \displaystyle\frac{P(D) - P(D\vert \bar{F})}{P(D)},$$
where $P(D)$ is the prevalence of the outcome in the overall population and $P(D\vert \bar{F})$ is the prevalence of the outcome among those that are not exposed. Using Bayes' rule or the law of total probability, i.e., $$P(D)=P(D\vert F)P(F)+P(D\vert \bar{F})P(\bar{F}),$$ the PAF can be expressed in terms of the exposure prevalence $P(F)$ and the relative risk given by $RR=P(D\vert F)/P(D\vert\bar{F})$ as follows [see (1953) and Leviton (1973)]:

$$\begin{align*}
PAF &= \displaystyle\frac{P(D) - P(D\vert \bar{F})}{P(D)} \\
&= \displaystyle\frac{P(D\vert F)P(F)+P(D\vert \bar{F})P(\bar{F}) - P(D\vert \bar{F})}{P(D\vert F)P(F)+P(D\vert \bar{F})P(\bar{F})}\\
&= \displaystyle\frac{P(D\vert F)P(F)+P(D\vert \bar{F})(1-P(F)) - P(D\vert \bar{F})}{P(D\vert F)P(F)+P(D\vert \bar{F})(1-P(F))}\\
&= \displaystyle\frac{P(F)[P(D\vert F) - P(D\vert\bar{F})]}{P(\bar{F})[P(D\vert F)-P(D\vert\bar{F})] + P(D\vert\bar{F})}\\
&= \displaystyle\frac{P(F)\left[\displaystyle\frac{P(D\vert F)}{P(D\vert\bar{F})}-1 \right]}{P(F)\left[\displaystyle\frac{P(D\vert F)}{P(D\vert\bar{F})} - 1 \right] + 1}\\
&= \displaystyle\frac{P(F)[RR - 1]}{P(F)[RR - 1] + 1}.
\end{align*}$$

Thus, if one can calculate the minimum detectable relative risk (RR), then one can calculate the minimum detectable PAF since the PAF is a monotonically increasing function of RR as follows:

$$\begin{align*}
PAF &= \displaystyle\frac{P(F)[RR - 1]}{P(F)[RR - 1] + 1} \\
&= \displaystyle\frac{P(F)[RR - 1] + 1 - 1}{P(F)[RR - 1] + 1} \\
&= 1 - \displaystyle\frac{1}{P(F)[RR - 1] + 1}
\end{align*}$$

So to calculate the minimum detectable PAF, given the sample size, exposure prevalence $P(F)$, overall outcome prevalence (or rate), do the following:
1. Use standard software to calculate the minimum detectable relative risk or hazard ratio assuming, say, 80% power. 
2. Calculate the corresponding PAF using the relationship above. That should be the minimum detectable PAF since there is a monotonic relationship between RR and PAF.

#### Relevant References:

Browner WS, Newman TB. Sample size and power based on the population attributable fraction. American Journal of Public Health. 1989 Sep;79(9):1289-94.

Crowson CS, Therneau TM, O’Fallon WM. Attributable risk estimation in cohort studies. Technical Report; 2009 Oct 8.

Levin ML. "The occurrence of lung cancer in man." Acta Unio int contra cancrum 9 (1953): 531-941.

Leviton A. Definitions of attributable risk. American journal of epidemiology. 1973 Sep 1;98(3):231.
