---
title: 'Power calculations for 1-way ANOVA with possibly unequal group sizes'
date: 2024-09-18
permalink: /posts/2024/09/post-3/
tags:
  - 1-way ANOVA 
  - Unequal group sizes
  - power calculations
  - sample size
---

I was recently asked to do sample size and power calculations in the setting of a 1-way ANOVA with unequal group sizes. There is a closed for solution to do this when the group sizes are equal, but not for the case were group sizes are unequal as assumptions need to be made, and depending on the assumptions the math gets complicated and/or simulations are required.

For the proposed power calculations, we were comparing an intervention arm of size 200 to two control arms, each of size 20. It was reasonable to assume the following:

* All outcomes were normally distributed with standard deviation, $\sigma = 1$.
* The first and largest group had mean $\delta$, while the other two groups had mean 0.

I first considered using simulations by generating data under the above assumptions, fitting a 1-way ANOVA assuming equal variances, and doing this $R$ times and calculating the proportion where the null hypothesis was rejected at the 0.05-level, i.e., power. But after doing the algebra, there is a closed-form solution in this setting, which I will describe below.

### 1-way ANOVA set-up and test statistic

For ANOVA with equal group sizes $n_1=n_2=\dots=n_G$, and common variance $\sigma^2$. Let $N$ denote the total sample size, i.e., $N=n_1+\dots+n_G$, and $\mu_W$ denoted the weighted mean of all groups. Additionally, define $\sigma_m^2$ as follows:

$$\sigma_m^2 = \displaystyle\sum_{i=1}^G \displaystyle\frac{n_i}{N}\left(\mu_i - \mu_W \right)^2.$$ 

Cohen (1988) defined the effect size $f$ as:

$$f = \sqrt{\displaystyle\frac{\sigma_m^2}{\sigma^2}}.$$

Under the alternative hypothesis, the 1-way ANOVA test statistic follows a non-central F-distribution, $F_{G-1, N-G, \alpha}$, with non-centrality parameter $\lambda = Nf^2$, where $\alpha$ is the type I error rate. 

## Analytic approach under our assumptions

Under our assumptions above, we can obtain simplified expressions for $\mu_W$ and $\sigma_m^2$ as follows:

$$\mu_W=\displaystyle\frac{n_1}{N}\delta,$$

which can be used to calculate

$$\sigma_m^2 = \displaystyle\frac{n_1}{N}\left(\delta - \mu_W\right)^2 +\displaystyle\frac{n_2}{N}\mu_W^2 + 
\displaystyle\frac{n_3}{N}\mu_W^2 + 
\displaystyle\frac{n_4}{N}\mu_W^2 = \displaystyle\frac{n_1}{N}\left(\delta - \mu_W\right)^2 +\displaystyle\frac{N - n_1}{N}\mu_W^2=\delta^2\left[\displaystyle\frac{n_1(N-n_1)}{N^2}\right]$$

The effect size is given by $f=\sigma_m$, which can be easily calculated from the above expression. 

So for a given effect size $f$, in the setting described above, this specified that the mean of the first group, given by $\delta$ is 

$$\delta = f \displaystyle\frac{N}{\sqrt{n_1(N-n_1)}}.$$
